well good evening everybody and welcome
to my november 2020
planetarium show
this uh is set up to show us the night
sky
as it would be during november
specifically it's set for the 1st
of november but the only real difference
will be the position of the moon from
night to night
the rest of the objects will be much as
described
so we at the early afternoon we're going
to move on till
5 o'clock in the evening when the sunset
really
begins to bring the sky to its orange
and color
there's a couple of bright objects
immediately visible in the south
and those are the giant planets jupiter
and saturn
we'll go and look at jupiter first
once we zoom into about this level we're
seeing jupiter as it would appear
with a six inch or eight inch telescope
and this is a typical sort of view that
amateur
would get we can see the disc of the
planet and we can see laid out two on
each side
the four main galilean moons discovered
by galileo
if we had a more powerful instrument we
can zoom in and get a much larger view
of the disc of the planet here showing
real detail
in the cloud belts the two main belts
just north and south of the equator
there
and the polar regions and lots of little
storms and bubbles going on on there
and those blue uh regions are called
barges
we'll pull back away from jupiter though
and go and have a look at some of its
moons
the four big ones begin with the
innermost
io and this is the color of a pizza
it's actually caused by sulfur this is
the most volcanic
world in the solar system every one of
those black regions
is an active volcano on io spewing
sulfur all over the surface
moving on out a rather contrasting
little world
europa the second moon from jupiter
about the same size as io and these two
are both about the same size as our own
moon europa is covered in
ice though with one or two cracks and
grooves running through it there
and those are bringing dirty material up
from an ocean of water that lies
underneath the ice
and it's a possible habitat there for
some form of alien life form
just to the left of jupiter we find the
next moon ganymede and this is the
largest moon in the solar system
bigger even than the planet mercury if
it orbited the sun we would call it a
planet
but it orbits jupiter so we call it a
moon
glaciers and a few craters on the
surface there and again
this might also have an a watery
salty ocean underneath that icy crust
in which alien creatures could be living
right now
the fourth moon from jupiter is
the dark moon callisto covered in
craters
and a much older less geologically
active surface
again this is almost the same size as
the planet mercury so
quite substantial objects in their own
right
jupiter of course has many other moons
at least 79 at the last
count and that number seems to go up all
the time
now we can see jupiter and saturn bright
in the sky there
and the milky way diving down to the
horizon to the right
let's zoom in on saturn and the first
thing you'll of course
see with saturn is its rings as soon as
we get
a reasonable magnification we see the
disk of the planet and the rings around
it
we can also see some of the moons
they're labeled up for you there with
titan to the right
diony ria tephis and the smaller moons
enceladus and hyperion
if we zoom in a bit further we can get a
bit more detail visible on the main
planet itself
you'll see the pastel shades of the
cloud
tops there and also the detail in the
rings with the main
a and b rings divided by that dark gap
the cassini division
and then the thinner gap in the outer
ring there the nk division
we'll just pan across now and have a
little look at titan
another large moon this is about the
same size as the planet mercury as well
and has its own atmosphere thicker even
than that of the earth
and full of this orange organic smog
very very interesting chemistry going on
in the atmosphere of titan producing all
sorts of
organic molecules but at very low
temperatures
this far from the sun it's only minus
160 degrees centigrade
we'll pull back from saturn and jupiter
there and
move across to find the real star of the
show
for this month and that uh will be
best placed about seven o'clock so we'll
just let time run forward
by an hour until we get there we see one
or two satellites moving across the
screen
software that i'm using to generate this
knows all about the positions
of many satellites including the
international space station
which we might just catch a glimpse of
later on
but here's the main star of the show we
have the constellation pisces
the fish one of the constellations of
the zodiac
those are supposed to be the heads of
the fish and their tails tied together
with seaweed
you'll see that in the artwork when i
bring that onto the screen
here we are that's what that's supposed
to look like
but there's a very very bright and
orangey red
looking object lurking there in the
constellation of pisces
and that of course is the planet mars
mars is perfectly positioned for
observing at the moment
the earth has just overtaken it on the
inside
of our orbit and that puts us very very
close
in terms of distance which makes mars
look larger
so as we zoom in on mars we start to see
the beginnings of detail
and then we'll see you there mars's
moons phobos and demos
plus the desert markings of siatis major
looks like an upside down rendering of
the con the uh
of africa there on the surface the
highland
regions of cities major if we zoom in
even further on mars you'll see that
there's
a lot more detail going on
a number of impact craters a giant
volcano
there with its uh the bright region and
the little tiny polar cap at the bottom
there
it's summer down there on that side of
mars at the moment
so the polar cap is highly shrunken
and we can't see the opposite cat it's
tipped over the horizon there we'll pull
back away from mars though
go to the wide view and we'll see
what other constellations we can find
so this is the constellation of pegasus
the winged horse and we have the great
square of pegasus to the left there a
very prominent feature in this
night sky at this time and you can see
the
stick diagram pegasus upside down of
course
lots of things in astronomy tend to be
upside down
just above pisces and aquarius
so that's the constellation of pegasus
and it contains some very interesting
galaxies that we can go and look at
this one is ngc 7331
there's the main spiral galaxy there but
you can also see in the image
one or two smaller galaxies this is the
hubble space telescope view that we've
replaced
in in the software and down to the right
there's another little cluster of
galaxies called stefan's quintet
340 million light years away
so the light that was captured by the
camera there set off
before the dinosaurs were even born
now we'll go to the left of pegasus and
the constellation of
andromeda very well placed for
observations at this time of year
it shares a corner star there with this
great square of pegasus
and lives just above the top of pisces
there we have andromeda the maiden laid
out along the
stick diagram that's what it's supposed
to look like
but of course there's a very famous
object and you can already see it
and that's the andromeda galaxy we live
in a galaxy called the milky way
our neighboring galaxy is this
about a trillion stars all orbiting
around their common center of mass with
a supermassive
black hole right at the center that we
can't see obscured by
billions of stars blocking our line of
sight
here's the hubble image to show you
you can see the dark dust lanes around
the spiral arms
and then bright objects in the center
there that's a small companion galaxy
messier object number 32
these small dwarf galaxies orbit around
the main
andromeda galaxy and we have a few we
have the large and small magellanic
clouds that are dwarf galaxies
that orbit around the milky way this is
another slightly larger
companion dwarf galaxy
an entire group of andromeda and its
dwarf galaxies are all moving towards
the milky way
at 163 kilometers per second
and in about four billion five billion
years time
andromeda and milky way will merge to
form one large super galaxy
also getting in on the act will be the
third member of our
galactic neighborhood and that's the
triangulum galaxy
here just down in the small
constellation below andromeda
much more face on we see the spiral
structure in the spiral arms there
but it's about a tenth the size of
either andromeda or the milky way but it
too will merge
with them both and become part of a
super galaxy
in 5000 million years time
ten times further away we have the outer
limits galaxy
this is very much an edge-on view of a
spiral galaxy
so much so that looks like two fried
eggs back to back
you can see the bulge of the nucleus
where the yolks would be
and where the white would be the spiral
arms with that dirty dust lane
carving its way across the middle
so we'll pull back away from andromeda
there
still see the andromeda galaxy that's
visible to the naked eye
but just down here we have the planet
uranus
very much a parade of planets going on
at the moment
all lined up nicely across the sky
here's the greenish
white disc of uranus and its moons
oberon
umbriel ariel miranda titania the five
big ones
and then some smaller ones puck and
juliet marked there
also has its own system of rings they're
not visible to us
here from earth they were discovered by
the voyager 2 spacecraft
which is the only spacecraft to have
visited this part of the solar system
and took a flyby of uranus back in the
1980s
a few features on the surface there some
cloud belts
but very much a pale greenish color
caused by
methane high in the atmosphere of the
planet
so that was uranus
we're now going to take a little bit of
a look at our nearest neighbor
and that's the moon and the moon is just
on
the cusp of being full on the first of
november
and again right at the end of november
it'll be full again
so it'll go through its full collection
of phases here we see it
with the mare the dark seas these round
impact basins where the moon was struck
early in its life by large incoming
space rocks
puncturing holes in the surface and
letting lava flood out from the molten
interior
and the moon is sat in the constellation
of taurus
at the moment but over here we have an
object that
you won't have seen i'm sure this is the
largest of the asteroids
number one series it's
just 950 kilometers across and too small
to
show as anything other than a point of
light
with amateur telescopes but we now have
some fabulous views of this little world
that orbits between mars and jupiter
because we have the dawn spacecraft in
orbit around
series at the moment it's been there for
some years
taking the most fantastic detailed views
of the surface of this intriguing little
world
unlike some of the moons of jupiter it's
it looks
likely that this is an ice crust
covering a liquid
water ocean underneath you can see it's
been peppered with craters but they're
all
rather soft looking that's because of
the slightly slushy nature
of the ice on the surface there so a
fascinating world
moving on then from ceres the largest of
the asteroids
we'll actually run the clock forward to
nine o'clock now
so we'll start to see a few moving
satellites again
and the stars will start to rotate
slightly
here we go this is uh
time moving at a much greater than
normal speed
and we'll pan across to the face of
taurus the bull
that v v-shape on its side with the
bright orange star
aldebaran marking the eye of taurus the
bull
it's got enormous horns out to the left
there
there you can see the artwork and of
course the moon is sat in the
constellation
of taurus as we saw
we take the artwork away we can see the
face of taurus the bull is made up of
that v-shaped star cluster
with the red giant star older baron
aldebaran is actually much nearer to us
than the rest of the stars
and on the bull's back we have the seven
sisters or the pleiades star cluster
this is a young star cluster 440 light
years away from us
containing about nine or ten very bright
hot
young blue stars and then hundreds
of slightly fainter white stars and an
even larger number
of yellow and orange and even red dwarf
stars
all born out of the same cloud of gas
and dust
something like 500 million years ago
if we go to the top corner of one of the
horns of taurus the pool we find the
opposite end of stellar evolution
this is the crab nebula a supernova
remnant that
uh where the star in the middle blew up
and was observed by the chinese in the
year 1054
as a bright new star in the sky when we
look back we now see the expanding shock
wave of gas
there called the crab nebula
now back over towards the south in the
constellation of
aquarius the water carrier marked out by
this stick diagram here
just to the west of pisces and quite
well placed we have the last planets on
the tour
for this evening there's the water
carrier you can see
that one of the fish of pisces and the
upside down head of pegasus
so all in the same region of the sky
well placed
and high in the south so it's good for
observation
so we'll drill down into the center of
the constellation of aquarius and reveal
the planet neptune
there it is faint blue dot
very difficult to observe unless you're
an expert
or have a really good star map but if
you do you can
find it and you will see a pale
blue star-like object
that isn't quite a point of light it
does show a small disc
with this software we can zoom in much
greater extent
and see the whole planet as it would
look from a flyby
as was done by voyager 2 again back in
the 1980s
so that's the blue disc of the ice giant
planet neptune
and it has one large moon and several
smaller ones the large moon
off to the right there is triton
and fascinating world in its own right
it almost looks like it's a possible
twin
of the dwarf planet pluto and it may be
that they share a common origin
but when we looked at the photographs
from the voyager flyby
triton seemed to be covered in pink snow
and have black markings on it that you
can see there
which are active geezers where liquid
nitrogen is being belched out from the
subsurface
and carrying dirty organic material
downwind
in the thin atmosphere of the little
moon which was quite a surprise
for an object so far from the sun to
have that much heat
that that sort of activity could still
carry on
now i'm afraid we've run out of time so
i've just panned upwards again we're
looking at the square of pegasus
right in the center the andromeda galaxy
is visible just uh upper left there and
also the triangulum galaxy
but what we're going to do is let time
run forwards and spin the sky around
until we begin to see the orange glow
there
coming up from the left and that is of
course the rising sun
as we approach dawn
still see the planet mars there shining
very brightly
got to be the star of the show at the
moment
but gradually all of this part of the
sky is heading down towards the horizon
and setting over here
in the west as we finally approach
6 45 in the morning and the end of the
show
so i hope you've enjoyed that the
software that i use to generate these
shows is called stellarium
you can download it for free it runs on
all common platforms including your
phones
and is an absolutely marvelous tool for
understanding the night sky
so do check out my other planetarium
shows for other times of the year
and also my other videos here on youtube
there are some links on the screen now
and you should be able to
enjoy many many different aspects of
astronomy
by having a look at some of those so i
do recommend
you try that out thank you very much